---
title: Dignity of Choice
subtitle: Exploring autonomy in human experience
date: "2024-06-01"
tags: [philosophy, religion]
---
*Why did God put the tree of knowledge of good and evil in the garden of Eden if he had known that Adam would disobey Him and eat of it?*

God created everything on earth — the day, the night, the trees, the soil, the birds, and all other animals that walk the earth and swim in the seas. When God created man, He looked at Himself and made man in His image. That is to say, man would be a reflection of God’s attributes — love, justice, compassion, creativity, goodness — but not an exact copy of Him. To be an exact copy would mean that man came into this world all-knowing and all-powerful, just like God. But to be all-knowing, man would also have to know the absence of God — where evil, suffering, and death reside — and arrive at a full and complete understanding of all forces of the universe and how they interact. With Adam and Eve having just been created and knowing nothing but goodness and life, how could either of them have conceived of this thing called “death” that the fruit of knowledge would apparently promise? And to never know of anything else is to never have the choice to. How could they know what it means to choose at all? After all, everything so far that man had spoken or could ever need just *was* — his animals, his food supply, his companion, his entire reality. Man had no real sense of morality or justice, else that would imply an understanding of immorality and injustice in addition to the ability to choose between the two. 

The tree of knowledge of good and evil gave man relativity — an essential component of learning. And to learn means to acquire knowledge of something by way of study or the experience of being taught. So when God said “But you must not eat from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, for when you eat from it, you will surely die,” it wasn’t a threat; it was His warning to man that he would be stepping into a world in which man learns what it means to be without God. He would learn scarcity, hatred, selfishness, jealousy, constraint, loss, and evil. 

This became his experience before he had been able to achieve complete obedience, which means man’s struggle from then on would be the presence of choice — free will. But if man had only known complete obedience to God, he would still be missing the key component of choice: relativity. That is, until God should decide to give man the fruit of knowledge. But God is so merciful and honest, He did not withhold a thing in the entire world from man. He placed the tree in the garden not to tempt man, but because true love and obedience can only exist where there is the freedom to choose otherwise. Without choice, there can be no relationship — only programming.

God knows the grief of loss, and He could have prevented Himself from experiencing it. He could have protected Himself from the pain of being rejected, but instead, He gave us the dignity of choice. His mercy was never in withholding pain, but in promising to walk through it with us — and to rescue us from it. In giving us the freedom to walk away, He made possible the beauty of our return. For mercy is not the erasure of the knowledge or memory of pain, but offering rescue from it.

I believe it was just as painful for God to lose man as it was for man to lose God. However, God denied us of nothing — including the freedom to deny Him. We were always meant to experience happiness and suffering, gain and loss, emptiness and fulfillment, love and hate. All the Lord wants is that we return the mercy He has shown us, relieving Him of the pain of our departure by choosing Him in the end.